Come on.
I got a script, Governor, because time is so limited.
Oh, my goodness.
Okay.
Anyway, for better or worse, this may well be one of the most studied campaigns of the 20th century, your campaign for the presidency.
Yeah.
I wonder, you had a 17-point lead.
Have you had time to reflect?
Let me say this.
Poll leads are worthless.
I mean,
Jimmy Carter had an alleged 30-point lead, and he won by one point.
I mean, these things are very artificial.
We knew we'd get a bounce out of the convention.
We knew he'd get a bounce out of the convention.
We figured we'd come out of the whole process about even, and that's what happened.
What happened?
I thought we had a fine organization, superb fundraising.
Our communications and media were not good.
We didn't communicate effectively, nor did we deal effectively with the kind of negative campaign that was run against us.
We knew it was coming.
We had no question what they were going to do.
You expected that?
Sure, sure, no question about it.
I mean, they were doing negative research on me for months up here, but we didn't do a very effective job of dealing with it, and we lost the election, and it's very unfortunate.
Some people have suggested that maybe you could have brought some people in from Washington.
We did.
Do you have any regrets about running the campaign here from Boston?
We did, we did.
I mean, there were all kinds of people who were involved who came in from Washington.
Kirk O'Donnell came up.
We had all kinds of people.
We had a Washington group who was deeply involved.
We had people from the other Democratic campaigns who came in very soon after the primaries.
I mean, some of my key big state coordinators were some of the best organizational people that the other primary candidates had had.
So there was no lack of good people who weren't necessarily involved in the primary campaign who were
Okay, people, but do you regret running it from Boston?
No, no, no, I don't think the location needed it.
A lot of people said it did.
David Broder, I guess, and a few of the others, or whatever.
It should have been in Washington.
Well, that the campaign might have been right.
I don't know that that would have been it.
I mean, that wasn't the problem.
They came at us with a very tough negative campaign, and we did not do a good job of dealing with it.
Now, I've been through negative campaigns before.
I'd lost one, and I'd won one.
But this was one where we just did not do an effective job of dealing with him.
Any thoughts on what you should have done, might have done?
Well, I think most people in retrospect would say that I should have gone on the attack against Bush as soon as he started his attacks.
I think that's, you know, I'm not sure even with the benefit of hindsight that you can exactly say what we should have done.
It was my general sense that the American people were looking for a campaign that was positive, that was optimistic, that didn't deteriorate into a name-calling contest in June and July.
But it didn't... That's the way we had... On one side.
Yeah, that's the way we had run the primary campaign, and we got it very successfully, and we came out of that primary process in a very positive way.
And so for a while...
We chose to kind of go at our issues and try to continue to be positive and not engage in the kind of thing that seems to me turns people off, makes them even more cynical about the political process than in many cases people are, and so on.
Obviously, it didn't work.
I remember Mario Cuomo the other day said, look, I told Mike to forget about the negative stuff.
I didn't think it would...
And he did.
Mara said, look, don't pay any attention to that.
Do what you're doing and so on and so forth.
He said, in retrospect, I was wrong.
I remember towards the end of the campaign, I think you were in Texas, and you paraphrased Sam Rayburn to the effect that the people can smell the garbage and they know it when they smell it.
Maybe a conservative, he said.
And I remember cheering.
I can smell garbage.
Maybe that was, you know, in retrospect, that was too late.
Okay.
I mean, the Boston Harbor thing was as far as a $3 bill.
I mean, we'd not only been cleaning this place up for four years, but the administration had done everything it could.
First, we got no answers from it for five years.
And I was out of office for four or five.
And secondly, Mr. Bush was part of the crew that was trying to effectively eliminate federal support for the Clean Water Act.
But we didn't do a very effective job of saying it or doing it.
And I guess in retrospect, in retrospect,
If somebody comes at you the way Bush came at me, you just got to go back at them.
All right.
It may not be the way you like the campaign.
It's not the way I like the campaign.
But I think that has to be one of the conclusions you draw from this.
Now, what it does to the public attitude, this cynicism we have about politics in this country is serious, because I think people
I mean, it adds to public cynicism, but on the other hand, we all know what happened.
Have you reconsidered your assessment of the quality of the American electorate?
No, no.
The intelligence?
I hate to ask it this way.
It's a television age.
Most people get their news from television, make their impressions based on what they're seeing out there, and it just means that you've got to deal with this kind of negative impact.
You know what happened the other day in Colorado?
So it was a big fight over a new airport.
The governor and a lot of people were for it.
Certain people against it went through.
The people who were against it went through.
Overwhelming them.
The people who were against it hired Ailes.
Ailes became an issue in the campaign.
They used Ailes negatively against the anti-airport people.
And apparently it worked.
Just a parenthetical thing.
Joe McGuinness is a friend of mine.
He did the book where they introduced Roger Ailes.
Right.
and this was kind of off the record, but he said at the beginning, even long before you were even one of the front runners, Dale said, well, I'd like Dukakis.
And he said, why?
He said, well, I'll find something.
I mean, look, the technique is as old as this.
I'll find something.
It's getting to be, I mean, you pick out certain things in a particular individual's record, you know, which in many cases are either badly distorted
Or relatively unimportant, you know?
And you just, I mean, he did it with, who was the guy?
Huddleston in Kentucky, who had missed some roll call votes or something.
And he had a dog sniffing around looking for Huddleston.
So this guy, Mitch McConnell, you know?
And Huddleston was 30 points ahead, I mean, over here for granted.
And he never responded to the dog ad.
And apparently, I mean, I think I'm correct in saying Huddleston's roll call record was actually quite good, you know?
But he had missed a few or something.
I don't know what it was.
And McConnell beat Huddleston.
I mean, that's the classic kind of heavy television negative.
What happens now to campaigning with this negative?
This is a case of a president being elected who did not run for anything, but he ran against Michael Katakis.
I think what it means is that you're going to see a lot more of this.
I mean, in the three congressional races that have taken place so far, the Democrats have won two out of three, right?
In Indiana, Alabama, and Wyoming.
The Democrats didn't hesitate for one minute.
They came out of the box shooting.
And they won.
So this is the way it's going to be.
Gloves off?
I guess.
But you can't, you know, it's pretty obvious based on my experience that you cannot let the kinds of lies and distortions that were being peddled off the ground.
I mean, for two days.
If you do, you're going to be hurt.
You were in the White House last night.
They made a big deal out of it on Today Hill this morning.
He asked me what I was going to ask the president for.
He said, money for Boston Harbor.
He zeroed it out.
Did you get a chance to chat?
Yeah, sure, a little bit.
And we talked when he was at BU Sunday.
But Bill Riley, the EPA administrator, was at my table.
So I said, when do I get my money?
Maybe it's a silly question, but what were your feelings in there?
Any feelings?
You've got to be.
I've grown up about this.
I mean, this is the 11th dinner that Gillian had.
I've got to confess, last year we were looking the place over with a little more interest than we had in the past.
But we had a good time, and they had good people in the industry.
I guess we all want to know, I mean, you still didn't do that badly.
I mean, we came within, what, a three-point swing?
A dozen states.
You keyed on those states and had they... There was a dozen.
There was three points.
Three points.
The other way.
Could have been a different... And it would have been a different result.
But you're a competitor.
You're a fighter.
You're winding up this term as governor.
Then what?
Yeah.
Well, look, I've got a job to do here.
We obviously have some fiscal problems, fortunately.
I mean, they're serious.
Some of our neighbors are even more serious.
I'm looking at Connecticut these days and New Jersey and some of these places.
We've got to deal with that, and I intend it.
And I want to walk out of here with a state of solid shape.
And then we'll see, Nick.
I mean, it's one of these, you never say never.
On the other hand, it's one of these things where you just can't plan too far ahead.
And at this point, I've been in politics for 30 years.
I've been governor of a great state for twice as long as anybody in the last 150 years.
My party's nominee for the presidency, you know, came close to the top of the mountain, not quite.
And, you know, both Kitty and I are still young and energetic, enjoying our granddaughter.
You're not ruling it out, in other words.
No, I don't think you're ruling anything out.
But at this point, I want to do my job as governor, do it well, and finish up in good, solid shape, and then we'll see.
I'm writing the magazine piece, and Ted is doing something for the Daily.
And so he does have a few specific questions that relate to the Greek community, and maybe I could fire one at you for him.
What is your impression, Your Excellency, from this last campaign, from the Greek-American community?
Are you satisfied with the response you got?
I'd say two things.
First, the response was unbelievable, just overwhelming.
And it was a wonderful thing to see and feel.
I cannot express to you quite the emotions that I sensed and I felt and my family felt.
That rally in Astoria had to be one of the most, and it was one of many.
And I mean everything from the rally in Astoria to going into a small town in Iowa where there's one Greek family running the pizza place and walking in.
speaking Greek and so forth.
The second thing is that my impression is that, or at least I've been told this, that the campaign really united the Greek community, the Greek-American community, in a very special way.
It had not happened in a long time.
People really rallied around, and it was terrific to see.
Do you know what Greek name I gave you in one of my pieces?
The Great Alejandro.
I received such a great response.
I didn't get pneumonia.
For a swim.
Mr. Governor, some leaders of the Greek American community during your campaign, we are not as supportive as they should be.
Do you feel bitter about that?
Not many.
On the contrary.
I mean, I thought the support was overwhelming.
I mean, look, you're not going to get it.
100% support no matter who you are, but I thought it was just... Specifically, how did you feel when you saw your spiritual about his eminence applauding enthusiastically Mr. Booth during the... But at the convention?
Yes.
Well, that's a judgment.
No, no, no.
Look, he's invited.
I think he has a responsibility to go.
I mean, there wasn't any question about where his eminence was.
I mean, he was about as helpful and supportive as any...
clergy could possibly be consistent with his responsibilities.
Did you think maybe you should have had him in Atlanta, though?
Was that kind of a coup for them to have him in Atlanta?
Was the Archbishop with us?
Yes, he was.
In Atlanta?
They stuck him right on the stage, though, the Republican stage.
He was in the box with my family, right?
Yes, he was.
The impression that was given during the Republican convention was that he allowed himself to be used.
If he had refused, then what people would have said?
What would they have said, you know?
But given the fact that you were the first Greek American running for the presidency ever.
Yeah, but I don't think that's it.
I don't think that was a factor.
No, and he was terrific.
I mean, I cannot say enough for him.
He's always been very close to our family.
He was my parish priest when I was a kid.
He's been very supportive and very encouraging, and he was this time.
Any assessment on the Bush?
I think it's still too early.
I'm not a hundred days fan.
I think you've got to give a new administration seven or eight months to get...
get underway.
I mean, obviously they've had some problems getting started.
They seem to be off balance.
Yeah, but these are supposed to be the pros, ready to hit the ground running, to use the cliche.
You know, I mean, in fairness to Bush, I don't think he's a hundred days guy.
I think he's trying to build a foundation now.
You know, I mean, there's some obvious problems there.
His first white fight with the Congress is going to be over 30 cent difference of opinion on the minimum wage.
You know, the Alaska thing was
I heard your comment that night at the Alpha Omega dinner, though.
What did Jay Leno line about?
Yeah, wonderful line.
Fish in the harbor.
Boston Harbor doesn't look so bad now.
No, no.
Fish in the harbor.
Fish in the harbor looking better and better every day.
What I'm concerned about is our willingness and our ability
to seize the initiative internationally at a time when it seems to me our values are in the ascendancy.
Why is it that Gorbachev seems to be the initiator, the driving force behind so much of these new ideas around the United States?
I mean, it's democracy that's breaking out all over the place.
And if he's serious about cutting conventional forces in Eastern Europe back to parity with NATO, we ought to be out there leading the charge.
I mean, you've got to be careful.
You've got to make sure that it's a step-by-step process.
There's inspection and verification every step of the way.
And we cannot let ourselves get into situations where people like Norieger are coming their nose at us.
To get back to the campaign, were you overconfident?
No.
You never were overconfident about the presidency of the United States.
Remember what I said at the beginning, it was a very, very, very long shot.
I mean, the fact that we did as well as we did at the time, I thought it was remarkable.
Pretty much it won it by April.
I mean, that was remarkable.
I mean, who was I, you know?
I started, you know, one and a half percent in the polls.
Amazing.
You know, the failure was after the convention.
I mean, we had a good run through the convention.
We weren't ready for the kind of attack, the attacks that came, and we should have been.
However, you did say that you anticipated it.
Yeah, but we just, whatever, you know, we just didn't have a strategy for dealing with it.
How about the media?
How would you assess their performance?
Well, I don't have a problem with media, except to say that one of the things that you learn in a presidential campaign, especially after the convention, is that in this television age,
what happens on television and how you deal with it is very important.
Now that, you know, I've been dealing with television all my life, but the difference between running for presidency as the nominee and running, say, for governorship is that you have an opportunity as a candidate for governor to be out there touching base with people out on the street and so on and so forth.
You can't do that.
I mean, you're surrounded by a wall of national reporters and you move with that crew and everything you do is basically recorded, you know, for
I mean, you can't have the kind of contact with... But do they give you a fair shake?
I mean, do you think... Yeah, I don't think... Do you think they really played up the negative attacks, or do they have to?
Well, you know, I mean... But look, it's the responsibility of the candidates and the candidates' campaign to deal with that, first and foremost.
So they were reporting... But I don't think they were unfair.
Did you have one more you wanted to ask?
Because we're running out of time.
Well... You wanted to ask one about Papandreou, I think.
Yeah.
I'm very sure that...
Like all of us, you have written, Your Excellency, of what's going on with the provincial government.
I have this gentleman in the Salem, Salem County Jail.
Indeed.
Without Bale, at all, I think.
He doesn't want to leave.
Mr. Lukakis, do you feel that all these standards have a negative portrait, a negative image on Greece in its period?
Yes.
Does it affect you personally?
It must affect me personally, but it does.
If you talk to people in the Congress who are friends of Greece, and especially the Greek Americans in Congress, they'll tell you that it's made the job of advocating for Greece more difficult.
No question.
And of course elections are coming up in less than a month.
What do you hear?
What do you... I don't have a sense of what's happening in Greece.
All I can tell you is that it certainly has affected the ability of our friends in Congress.
Do you love Greece?
I love Greece and I want to see Greece do well and I want the United States to be very supportive of Greece and that means that we need an atmosphere within which those of us who can advocate for Greece, who want a settlement and an end to the Turkish occupation of Cyprus can effectively lobby for that.
It's much more difficult if
Rightly or wrongly, people perceive that Greece is awash in scandal and all the rest of it.
Do you feel that Papandreou's period sort of people made things difficult for us here?
I'm not going to place blame.
All I can say is that the current situation in Greece has made things very difficult for those of us who have strong supporters of Greece.
Your Excellency, you are very supportive of the cyber system.
Yeah.
I had some rather strong things to say about Cyprus at the association meeting in New York.
But again, it's most helpful when... What we are doing wrong for the Cyprus issue for so many years.
What's happened?
What we are doing wrong.
The first thing that happened was that we let it happen.
We let it happen?
There's no secret about Kissinger's antagonism toward the Macarius, who was the only person in Cyprus at the time who could keep those two communities together.
Kissinger referred to Macarius as the Castro of the Eastern Mediterranean, remember?
And, you know, that was, the United States could have stopped that occupation, and we chose not to.
And the Archbishop almost lost his life, the circumstances, and it was a very sad,
Let me ask one wrap-up question, upbeat question, about a reflective question on what you feel your candidacy accomplished.
Well, I think in the Greek community, despite the loss, there was an enormous amount of pride.
And we all felt it.
And you could just sense it.
And it was a pride that we felt as Greek Americans, I think, a great many
first and second generation Americans of all ethnic backgrounds felt it.
And it's what America's all about.
A lot of disappointment, too, when I lost.
And I feel sad about that because I'm very proud of my heritage.
And I was very proud of the community and what it did and the way it responded.
But the sense I have is that despite the disappointment, people still feel that it was
It was a worthwhile effort, and they felt proud to be a part of it.
And it was just a terrific experience.
You can answer this yes or no, but did it hurt as much as losing to King did?
It hurt.
You never go into the presidency assuming you're going to win it.
I mean, you know it's the toughest battle you can ever face politically.
So I mean, I knew that from the beginning.
But when you work as hard as we all worked for two years, obviously, you know,
very disappointed when you don't win, particularly when you come that close.
And no regrets.
No regrets about running.
Regrets about losing.
Okay?
That's great.